Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, our gospel is the famous question to Jesus. You know, how many will be saved? I know it's everyone's favorite question. I'm not going to preach on it. I preach on it a lot.
A lot. I've written a lot so you can consult those.
But I want to focus on
On the second reading, which is from the marvelous letter to the Hebrews we've been reading from.
And it's a topic that is also very controversial.
And very important.
The topic of the divine
Punishment.
Does God punish us?
You know, when I was coming of age, I said this many times to you, there was such a one-sided view of God. God is in love and compassion.
passion and kindness.
that we never talked about this. Oh no, no, God doesn't punish. That's an old fashioned category and you know it's dangerous and don't talk about that. God is love.
Well, again, the problem, as I mentioned last week to you, is...
Love is not something namby-pamby. Love is willing the good of the other. And if we're off-kilter, then love is going to be kind of harsh.
Ours.
It's Dostoevsky, right? Love is a heart and it's dreadful thing sometimes, right?
And is the divine punishment something that
It's not in the Bible. It's just this later, you know, import from some hung up spirituality. No. In fact, you know,
It's impossible.
To avoid the theme of the divine punishment in the Bible, I'm going to give you a couple of examples.
I think of, you know, just a lot of the sufferings we endure in the natural world that are read in the book of Genesis as a punishment for suffering.
Sin, sin.
Think of the Tower of Babel and the scattering of people in the variety of languages as seen precisely as a
Response in punishment to sin.
If they come, Noah's Ark, the destruction of the world, the Bible construes as the result of our destruction.
Sin. Think of Israel's enslavement in Egypt is construed as chastisement. So is there long wandering in the desert?
When Israel loses a battle, I mean, almost invariably, it's seen as punishment for its
it's wickedness. Think of Saul's defeat as a result of his disobedience to God.
Yeah. Think of Eli's death.
as a result of his sin and that of his son. Think of David's punishment.
in the wake of the Bathsheba incident. Think of the Babylonian captivity and exile as construed by the prophets as a response to Israel's sin.
And I'm just giving you a couple of examples throughout the Old Testament.
Does God punish Israel? Yeah, it seems to me pretty clearly.
Can we see in every case
If Israel is going through something bad, it's punishment? No, not in every case.
But it's certainly mentioned a lot.
And you say, well, okay, that's Old Testament. It's tough.
No. Think again. Think again.
i'm looking paul in um.
It tells the Corinthians.
that many of you are sick and dying because of the way that of the Eucharist.
The Eucharistic gathering is being abused.
Look at Ananias and Sapphira, two figures in the Acts of the Apostles, struck dead because of the way they were handling money improperly.
And think of
In the culminating book of the Bible, the book of Revelation,
where this terrible destruction is visited upon the earth as a response.
to sin. Now look everybody, I understand the complexity of these biblical texts and there are different ways to read them and so on, but I think you're kind of hard pressed.
To see that
Divine punishment is not a motif in the Bible.
I think that's simply not the case. In fact, and it's not a minor motif, it's a rather major motif.
motif.
I've said before the difference between a theology of karma and a theology of grace, and the Bible, yes, is a book of grace, but there is a
is a theology of karma as well, right?
In other words, that bad behavior is answered in some way by punishment. Right.
Yes, that's true in the Bible.
Two.
Okay
So how do we make sense of this without falling back into a terrible view of God?
as a sort of arbitrary, capricious tyrant.
So, all right, I'm making my way through life, and all right, I made a mistake, I sinned, and so now this terrible punishment is visited upon me. Or is God, you know, like a puppeteer or something?
You're sort of playing with us, toying with us.
How do we make sense of this language without falling into that understanding of God? Well, can I suggest to you,
So this little passage for today from the letter to the Hebrews says,
gives us the interpretive key.
And it's a very helpful text.
Listen up.
My sons.
Do not disdain
The discipline of the Lord, nor lose heart,
When he reproves you,
For whom the Lord loves,
He disciplines.
He scourges.
Every son he receives.
Okay.
There's the master text.
Because it's predicated upon the master metaphor for God throughout the Bible.
In culminating in Jesus' own great prayer, the Our Father,
that God is best construed not as a deist, you know, cosmic force lying in a distance, nor as a capricious tyrant.
But God is best construed as a
Father.
As a parent.
So now
Listen to me, especially parents.
My sons do not disdain
The discipline of the Lord. That word's interesting, disciplina.
It's from the land where Dichere,
Disciple comes from the same word because it means to learn.
Huh.
No, discipline. No, arbitrary, cruel, you know, imposition. No, no. Discipline, properly understood. Discipline.
Is a learning
Process. Process.
In Greek, there's that lovely play, "mahthein, pahthein," "mahthein," I think, "mathematics," "mahthein," and he's like to learn, "pahthein is to suffer
Very often our learning
It comes from our suffering.
To bring them together, God disciplines us.
Those he loves.
And again, love is to will the good of the other.
God wants to
Teach.
He wants to love someone who's deep in sin that will look like and feel like
Punishment!
Again, parents.
you know what i'm talking about.
Or anyone that remembers their childhood coming of age.
Think of a little kid now. Let's begin with a toddler.
Who's having a tantrum
A tantrum means he's just not getting his way. His will is just completely set against what's best for him and for those around him. So the parent is
We'll say it's a time out for you.
I watch parents do this. It's kind of interesting to me how the kids will cooperate with it.
Time out. And they put the kid in the corner.
And you got to be there for five minutes or whatever it is.
What are they doing there?
They're stopping the resistance of the kid's will.
They're compelling him to stop this destructive behavior, destructive to himself and to others.
They're disciplining the child.
Now, parents that never do that,
All I mean, my kid does is great. I'm never going to...
i'm never gonna have a time out.
yeah, well, welcome to complete dysfunction, right, in that child.
I think now in the Bible, it's
So Jonah, right, is told what to do by God.
"'Go east by land, and Jonah went west by sea. "'He was throwing a tantrum, if you want.'"
What does God do?
The great fish swallows him up. Well, that's a...
That's a disciplining of his will.
It's a kind of time out. It's stopping Jonah in his rebellion and then limiting his freedom so as to bring him back where God wants him to be.
Friends, can we sometimes, fellow sinners here, listen to me, can we sometimes understand the suffering we're going through as a kind of, you know,
Divine restriction of our freedom.
So it's to bring us back where we need to be.
Now, move from a little toddler.
To an older kid, I remember when I was sixth grade, so what are you, eleven and sixth grade?
uh i was pretty.
I'm a cooperative kid. I usually wouldn't walk with authorities. But one time during the winter, I was...
I remember this great snowball fight broke out. It was the sixth grade against the seventh grade. I remember.
And it was one of these things where everybody got involved, you know, in Chicago days. There's plenty of snow around. And we got into this big snowball fight. And someone must have hit like a little ice or something.
He's just something in a snowball and a kid got hit and was bleeding. And finally, you know, out comes the principal, the
And she was a sister. And she said, all right, all right, I want all the sixth grade boys, all the seventh grade boys in my office now.
And so I remember we lined up and, you know, kind of afraid, what's going to happen? Well, she had this, this,
Paddle.
And it really wasn't that painful.
And we all, we came one by one and then she,
It gave us a whack, you know. Now, it wasn't physically all that painful, you know.
But it was humiliating. And the fact that I remember it to this day, how many years later? Yeah.
It was humiliating and.
Honestly, I never got involved in a snowball fight like that at school again.
She,
Punished me in a way that.
I got my attention and I realized, yeah, I'm not going to do that again.
All right. Let's say she had never done that. Oh, no, no. I never punished kids. Oh, no, no, never, never,
Welcome to dysfunction.
Um,
you know, go a little,
Further in life,
16, 16, 17, and 18. I
They've been drinking and driving.
In a way that's really dangerous to themselves and to others.
uh would a parent you know take away the keys? I mean you cannot drive for the next uh month you're grounded you can't use the car.
How cruel of you, how?
Capricious. I don't know.
It's a punishment.
That gets the attention, limits the freedom,
And imposes a painful penalty.
that brings that child back online, right? Now go a little further, go deeper into life now. Now you're a parent of an adult,
Child.
in late 20s or 30s.
You're stuck in an addiction. Maybe it's taboos or drugs or whatever it is.
And that addiction has become so destructive.
Of that person's life and the lives of those around him
It's become one of these dreadful, dreadful spiritual and physical crises.
And a parent at that point might have to engage in tough love.
The child comes back broke sick
hopeless and mom and dad could you please take me in. Can I?
no.
you can't come back at not.
How cruel, how awful.
No.
You can't come back in the house.
You have got to deal with this issue.
What are they doing? Well, as the term suggests, it's an act of love.
Love is willing the good of the other. Sometimes this terrible punishment
I'm separation. I'm separation.
Rejection. Rejection.
that terrible punishment is precisely what that addicted person needs to get his or her life back in order.
You know, so we see all these things readily enough. Why can't we see them in regard to God, who's not a distant, uncaring cause or force?
Verse.
but God was like a parent.
Our Father who art in heaven, we're always children.
Can't we see readily enough that God would sometimes engage
It would allow things to happen or actively impose punishment on
So as to bring us back on line.
Listen to this.
Endure your trials.
As the discipline of God who deals with you as sons
For what son is there whom his father does not discipline?
Good question. Good question.
I mean, if you're a son of a father who never disciplines you, you're going to be dysfunctional son, believe me, right?
You can specify it. What good father?
Whatever refrained from disciplining his son.
And then listen to this again the psychological realism is striking to me
At the time it's administered
All discipline seems a cause for grief.
But later it brings forth
The fruit of peace and justice.
To those who were trained in its school.
Dead right.
dead right.
When you're enduring whatever it is,
whatever darkness or difficulty or limitation, it just seems like dumb suffering. How, how, how could God allow this to happen?
But in time,
And with retrospect.
Can we see okay?
You know what that was?
It was a discipline, a learning.
Disciplina
It was a learning that I needed and maybe could not have gotten it any
Other way.
Not friends that --
So we should read every type of suffering under this rubric. I think that would be wrong too. Remember when they asked Jesus, who's responsible for this blind man's blindness? His own sin or his parents' sin?
And Jesus said, neither one.
It doesn't apply to every single case of suffering.
But are there times? Are there times?
When yes,
Our suffering is a type of discipline.
Precisely what we as children of a loving father need.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Aaron, please visit wordonfire.org.